feat: new .NET plugin (v2) (#1047)
canonical/craft-parts: docs/common/craft-parts/reference/plugins/dotnet_v2_plugin.rst

.. _craft_parts_dotnet_v2_plugin:

.NET plugin (v2)
================

> The ``dotnet`` plugin builds .NET projects using the ``dotnet`` tool.
> 
> .. note::
>     This plugin supersedes :ref:`.NET plugin <craft_parts_dotnet_plugin>`.

Reviewer: Taking the opportunity here to improve on the intro:

```suggestion
The .NET plugin (v2) builds .NET projects using the `dotnet
<https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/core/tools/dotnet>`_ tool. It's the successor
to the :ref:`craft_parts_dotnet_plugin`.
```

Keywords
--------

In addition to the common :ref:`plugin <part-properties-plugin>` and
:ref:`sources <part-properties-sources>` keywords, this plugin provides the following
plugin-specific keywords:

> .. _global_flags:

Reviewer: Sphinx references are global, so we need to make new ones bespoke to this document.

```suggestion
.. _craft_parts_dotnet_v2_plugin-global-flags:
```

Global Flags
~~~~~~~~~~~~

dotnet-configuration
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
**Type:** string

**Default:** ``"Release"``

The .NET build configuration to use. Possible values are ``"Debug"`` and ``"Release"``.

dotnet-project
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
**Type:** string

> **Default:** ``None``

Reviewer: Should this be `"None"`? Or are we saying it's unset?

Author: We're saying it's unset, thus not present in the command if not specified. Should we say "Default: unset" instead?

Reviewer: Yes please!

> Path to the solution or project file to build relative to the root of the snap source.
> If a project or solution file is not specified, MSBuild will search t he root of the snap
> source for a file that has an extension that ends in either ``proj`` or ``sln``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The path to the solution or project file to build, relative to the root of the snap
source. If a path isn't specified, MSBuild will search the root of the source for a file
with the ``.proj`` or ``.sln`` extension.
```

Author: Thanks, this reads much better! One small detail that I added was `.*proj` instead of just `.proj`, since MSBuild project files can be language-specific, like `.csproj` for C# or `.fsproj` for F#.

dotnet-properties
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
**Type:** dict of strings to strings

> **Default:** Empty

Reviewer: For configurations, "Unset" is typically the best word to indicate that the setting isn't used. It avoids the confusion around null/nil/noop.

A list of MSBuild properties to be appended to the restore, build, and publish commands
in the format of ``-p:<Key>=<Value>``.

> .. _dotnet_self_contained:

Reviewer: Let's apply the same uniquifier to all of the new references.

dotnet-self-contained
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
**Type:** boolean

**Default:** ``False``

Create a self-contained .NET application. The Runtime Identifier (RID) will be automatically
set based on the ``$CRAFT_BUILD_FOR`` variable for a given build, such that:

+------------------------------+------------------------+
| ``$CRAFT_BUILD_FOR`` value   | .NET RID               |
+==============================+========================+
| ``amd64``                    | ``linux-x64``          |
+------------------------------+------------------------+
| ``arm64``                    | ``linux-arm64``        |
+------------------------------+------------------------+

dotnet-verbosity
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
**Type:** string

**Default:** ``"normal"``

Sets the MSBuild log output verbosity for the build. Possible values are:
``q[uiet]``, ``m[inimal]``, ``n[ormal]``, ``d[etailed]``, and ``diag[nostic]``.

.. _dotnet_version:

dotnet-version
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
**Type:** string

**Default:** ``None``

> Sets the .NET version to build the project with. By setting this property, the plugin

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Sets the .NET version to build the project with. By setting this key, the plugin
```

When we mean the named YAML key, let's use "key". This is a separate concern from the MSBuild properties.

**Default:** Empty

A list of MSBuild properties to be appended to the restore command in the format of
``-p:<Key>=<Value>``.

dotnet-restore-sources
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
**Type:** list of strings

**Default:** Empty

Specifies the URIs of the NuGet package sources to use during the restore operation.
This setting overrides all of the sources specified in the *nuget.config* files.

.. _build_flags:

Build Flags
~~~~~~~~~~~

dotnet-build-framework
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

**Type:** string

**Default:** ``None``

Compiles for a specific `framework`_. The framework must be defined in the `project file`_.
Examples: ``net7.0``, ``net462``.

dotnet-build-properties
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
**Type:** dict of strings to strings

**Default:** Empty

A list of MSBuild properties to be appended to the build command in the format of
``-p:<Key>=<Value>``.

.. _publish_flags:

Publish Flags
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

dotnet-publish-properties
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
**Type:** dict of strings to strings

**Default:** Empty

A list of MSBuild properties to be appended to the publish command in the format of
``-p:<Key>=<Value>``.

.. _dotnet-v2-details-begin:

Dependencies
------------

> The .NET plugin needs the ``dotnet`` executable to build programs. The plugin will

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The .NET plugin needs the dotnet executable to build programs. The plugin will
```

The command name doesn't need to be in code unless we're specifically discussing its use on the command line.

provision it by itself if :ref:`dotnet_version` is set.

If not, some common means of providing ``dotnet`` are:

> * The ``dotnet8`` Ubuntu package, declared as a ``build-package``.
> * The ``dotnet-sdk-80`` snap, declared as a ``build-snap`` from the desired channel.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The dotnet8 Ubuntu package, declared as a ``build-package``.
* The dotnet-sdk-80 snap, declared as a ``build-snap`` from the desired channel.
```

Same here. Package and snap names aren't code.

> * The ``dotnet-sdk-80`` snap, declared as a ``build-snap`` from the desired channel.

Reviewer: It's probably worth linking to the package and snap pages.

Another alternative is to define another part with the name ``dotnet-deps``, and

> declare that the part using the ``dotnet`` plugin comes :ref:`after <after>` the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
declare that the part using the .NET plugin (v2) comes :ref:`after <after>` the
```

We should insist on a plain-English name for the plugin, like we have in the title.

``dotnet-deps`` part. In this case, the plugin will assume that this new part will
stage the ``dotnet`` executable to be used in the build step. This can be useful,
for example, in cases where a specific, unreleased version of ``dotnet`` is desired
but unavailable as a snap or an Ubuntu package.

> .. note::
>     This plugin will validate the presence of .NET by running ``dotnet --version``.
>     Therefore, it is assumed that the ``dotnet`` executable is visible in the PATH.
>     To achieve that, make sure to append the location of the staged .NET SDK from
>     ``dotnet-deps`` to the PATH using the :ref:`build-environment <build_environment>`
>     property.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This plugin will validate the presence of .NET by running ``dotnet --version``.
Therefore, it assumes that the dotnet executable is visible in the PATH. To
achieve that, make sure to append the location of the staged .NET SDK from
``dotnet-deps`` to the PATH using the :ref:`build-environment <build_environment>`
property.
```

We generally don't need callouts. :)

Finally, whether the resulting built artifact will need the presence of the .NET
runtime to execute depends on the value of the :ref:`dotnet_self_contained` property:
self-contained builds bundle the necessary portions of the runtime in the generated
executable.

.. _dotnet-v2-details-end:

How it works
------------

During the build step the plugin performs the following actions:

* Call ``dotnet restore`` with the relevant :ref:`global flags <global_flags>` and
  :ref:`restore-specific flags <restore_flags>`.
* Call ``dotnet build --no-restore`` with the relevant :ref:`global flags <global_flags>` and
  :ref:`build-specific flags <build_flags>`.
* Call ``dotnet publish --no-restore --no-build`` with the relevant
  :ref:`global flags <global_flags>` and :ref:`publish-specific flags <publish_flags>`.
  The generated assets are placed by default into ``${CRAFT_PART_INSTALL}``.

Examples
--------

The following example uses the ``dotnet`` plugin to build an application with .NET 8 using

> the ``Debug`` configuration, generating assets that are self-contained.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the debug configuration, generating assets that are self-contained.
```

.. code-block:: yaml

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  :caption: Project file

```
